This paper is founded on two targets. The first one is an applied aim, that is to say trying to find a solution for what we call an environmental problem. In Causse Méjan, the problem is the progression of bush, as well as boxtrees (Buxus sempervirens) or juniper (Juniperus communis) and some trees, especially pines (Pinus sylvestris). This progression lead to devalorization of the originel landscape, which is stepic grassland on high karstic plateau. It is first a loss of esthetical value, as this landscape is quite uncommun and precious (photo). It is also a risk of degradation of touristical attraction. Green local tourism is yet developped but recently two external projets of investments in a large scale have been introduced. Of course, the main local activity is still sheep breeding. For this reason, progression of bush represents a waste of economical value, because of the concurrence between bush and grass, and a diminution of the resource. Finally, from the biological point of vue,
it is also a risk of regression of biodiversity, for some habitats of scarce species are threatened. It is of course contradictory with the status of Biosphere Reserve (MAB Program/Unesco) of part of this plateau, which leads to reintroduction of some species, like Prewalsky horses and vultures. Though local, this applied research have a general significance, because this kind of environmental problem have a large extension in rural areas.
The second target is theoretical. Our team focuses on the reinterrogation of the vidalian paradigm: man/environment relashionship, or nature/society relashionship. But instead of basing our analisis on the concept of region, we applied the paradigm to an interactions problem, requiring interdisciplinarity between naturalistic knowledge (biogeography, ecology), technical knowledge (agronomist) and social science (human geography, ethnology). This kind of problem gives an opportunity to link again physical and human geography, in a renewed practice. Finally, the objective of this interdisciplinary research is to precise the type of interactions between bush progression, representation and social practices and technical systems, and more generally to try to stress and hierarchize complex causalities between social and natural systems.
As the problem of bush progression calls several discipline, each one has its own hypothesis of interaction. For instance, for agronomist, the intensity of sheep greazing is linked to the stability of grassland,or to the progression of bush, if insufficient. For biogeographers, the chorological hypothesis links the location of mature trees or bush, producing seeds, with the diffusion of bushes. On other hand, some environmental conditions are more favourable for ligneous vegetation. For the social science, it was supposed an interaction betwenn the status of property and diference between commons and private land and the implantation of boxtree or junipers. In front of the complexity of the problem, several methods were used, as for example GIS or multivariate analisis, to match the heteregeneous data collected by the different displines, on a same sample area.
Here we present main results obtained with multivariate analysis, in one of our three sample areas, located on east part of the plateau, and representative of a rather modernized farm, caracterized by an extention of boxtrees.
The multivariate analysis are realized in several steps.
1- The first step is to describe vegetation and the stage of bush progression par Principal Component Analisis. To describe vegetation, the data are the frequencies of the dominant species in 85 sample stations, representing homogeneous areas (map 1). In the factorial space crossing axe 1 and axe 3 of P.C.A., we can see how bush is described, in opposition with grassland with Festuca glauca. The statistical individuals which are further located on the positive side of axe 3 corresponds with bush where frequency of boxtree is higher (fig.1). On the map 1, the areas corresponding appear important in the farm territory.
2- The second step is the application of canonical analisis, in order to point out correlations between vegetation and explanatory variables. Vegetation file is described again, this time under the influence of explanatory file. Different thematic files have been submitted to canonical analisis :
those referring to actual land use and social representations,
those referring to history (land use, property),
those referring to environmental conditions (geomorphology, pedology).
If the canonical analisis point out the same types of vegetation, that means that the explanatory factors are relevant. The correlation circle (fig.2 and fig.3) shows the same clusters as the P.C.A., ans especially the opposition between bush with boxtree and grassland with Festuca glauca. Some relevant correlations appear between some variables and the bush, for example the ancient land use as long fallow, or the actual use with a poor intensity of grazing.
3- At the end of this step, it is possible to present a general pattern which shows the mains factors correlated with bush with boxtrees. On figure 4, the size of the character is proportionnal to coefficient of correlation between vegetation and explanatory variables. The size of the links is proportional too with the correlation between the thematic explanatory variables themselves. Type of character refers to the nature of explanatory variables.
This pattern gives an idea of the hierarchy of factors, with some inexpected results :
a few influence of environmental conditions,
a low correlation between bush with boxtree and progression of ligneous vegetation (in contradiction with social representation, which emphasize this dynamic as dramatic),
the great influence of the history of land use, as important as the expected influence of actual grazing.
But at the observation of this pattern, we can think about relations between variables belonging to different files. This relations are suggested by dutted lines, as for example those linking environmental conditions with ancient land use, or those bounding ancient and actual land use, both rather extensive. It opens to further researches on the complexity of interactions betwween social and environmental factors.
The modelling we have done looks relevant Trying to stress the relashionship between different variables without predetermination, leads to new results, to a new vision of interactions between phenomenons which are not commonly linked, or if they are, leaving most of the variable as " black boxes ". It opens new hypotesis of interactions between nature and society. This results suggest to go further, deepening modelisation, using other methods, as for example " logit " model, as a possible validation of these first results.





© CYBERGEO 1998
