The history of town and country planning policy in France draws the main thrust about her emergence and political changes. Within the context of Reconstruction in 1945, M.R.U conceives the "town and country planning" as an aim that comes under town planning as a branch of learning : drawing up town planning plans in municipalities, damaged or not, on a national scale. This first point of note gives rise to questions about the 20's and the 30's and the years of Occupation. The investigation inside D.G.E.N, administrative organization established by Vichy governement in 1941, reveals the magnitude of thoughts between 1941 and 1944, about "industrial decentralization" and "stroke in towns" and the continuation of work inside administrative organizations established after the Liberation, stemmed from the division in D.G.E.N, especially inside M.R.U. The survey in the 20's and the 30's outlines the circles where a thought about town planning, extended to the territory, is developping. Between 1928 and 1939, C.S.A.O.R.P expands one's sphere of activity about "industrial decentralization", in the first place an answer to the problem of "badly off", a strategic solution against the threat of air raids next. The investigation inside M.R.U between 1944 and 1950 and the identification of high-ranking officials demonstrate their stability between the 20's and the 50's, in the field of town planning. At the same time, the survey inside this group of civil servants reveals the existence of other circles, who collaborate with them and take part in discussions : geografers and economists. Last but not least, the study about scientific circles induces a special care to the debates concerning planning policy in Paris and his suburbs. The administrative and scientific role played by Jean-François Gravier instigates the birth of a discourse against the capital. "Second capital" and the connection established by S.A.R.P in 1947 between plannig in Paris and town and country planning policy induce an urban restoration policy where housing shortage plays a crucial role. Planning policy in Paris points out an eclipse of town planners on behalf of Highways Department too.
