Cybergeo will be six years old in April: in the reality of the virtual, in the recent and fluctuating universe of publications online, this makes us at one and the same time pioneers and veterans. Even more surprisingly, it happens that we are also unique: among all the electronic journals in the social sciences, non combine as Cybergeo does, seniority, an exclusively electronic publication, freedom of access to the full text, publication and management by researchers, and an international board of readers! This is what has emerged in a study conducted by C. Kosmopoulos, which we will soon put online, under a new column devoted to the Internet and to the ways in which it is being used by scientists. With 2000 pages being read every day and 3200 subscribers to the Newsletter, our journal is very healthy; but we must continue to develop, and for this, we must also learn from others.
Therefore, in the very near future, we will be proposing a new type of presentation, for easier access, which should improve even more as we pass to a very high rate of output. We invite authors and the Editorial Board to imagine articles which would make use of all the potential of electronic support: archiving successive versions, presenting peer commentaries, reader reactions, illustrations, attachments, references, animations...and other discoveries born of hypertext and the multimedia.
From the beginning of this adventure, we have had the chance to work together to produce a journal made by teachers and researchers, offering information verified by the scientific community and freely available to all. Help us to maintain this approach! Setbacks in the new economy are not blocking the strong position of market support for the network, and scientific publishing is not falling behind. Will we know how to invent in order to remain strong ? This is in any case our challenge, to maintain quality communication with you, communication that diffuses the results of research in several of the European languages. Would this already be a privilege? In 1913, the music of Stravinski seemed to the ears of many critics to be little more than noise. As for the scientific uses that are possible through the Net, many more harmonics are yet to be discovered.
