Studies on urban spaces require detailed information with a high quality. This has a cost that limits its availability in the less developed countries and makes researchers dependent on existing resources. Whatever the considered problem, the question of sources is essential. With the development and democratization of GIS and satellite imagery, a large number of information from increasingly diversified sources becomes available. The civilian satellites to Earth observation flying over the planet for the years 1960-70, enable the detection and mapping of different ecosystems. In this study, we plan to explore the Dakar metropolitan area. Big African metropolis Dakar has a good-quality census coverage, which has recently been spatialized. We also have recent satellite images complementing this equipment. If a study on the crossing of census data with satellite information is not a very original approach, its application to the metropolitan Dakar will investigate specifically the sub-space urban areas of the city. Interest will therefore to establish links between social attributes (by census data), landscapes in these areas, and their occupation of the land (environmental variables extracted from satellite imagery). These preliminary results, presented here, will be the cornerstone of a study of urban malaria, which questions the interactions between the space of the vector, Anopheles, and that of the host, the human being. However, the spatial distribution of the vector is closely related to socio-economic attributes of populations. In other words, we wish initially to assess the relevance of these two sources in order to approach the wealth inequalities of the population of Dakar. This concept is defined synthetically by the lack of material resources of the inhabitants, which places them in a precarious and unstable situation when they are subjected to an external threat (eg floods, diseases, ...) This work will also inform the geography of the city of Dakar, at a fine scale or even very fine.
