The irrigated perimeters of the Office of Niger seem to take a new start as the programs of rehabilitation succeed. Nevertheless, in spite of real progresses, we have to insist on the absence of any regional conception of development in those agricultural programs. Especially, the deficiency of management of the natural resorts while the drought is persisting, leads to environmental degradations. Despite an improvement of water management, wastes are still enormous. Soils suffer diverse form of degradation. The needs of fuel wood are increasing rapidly, so, the supply of irrigated perimeters particularly the five urban centres leads to problems : the nearer resorts of wood are exhausted and prices are growing up. The Office of Niger cattle count some 300 000 animals and its management become difficult. Cultures of rice and vegetable are spreading in the irrigated zone and surroundings while rain cultures are developing in the dry zone, even in the pastoral area. The degradations on the cultures and on the hydraulic network are increasing, leading to conflicts between shepherds and farmers. However, some enterprises seem to be able to stop this evolution and to preserve the resorts. The intensification of breeding is beginning in some sectors of the Office (Niono and N’Débougou), the creation of a transformation unit in Niono is inciting the production of milk. Nevertheless, these progresses stand embryonic and divided. So, it is necessary to widen the reflection to the whole region, and to considerate the complicated relations which exist between the dry regions and the irrigated perimeters and the plural functions of resorts and lands. While new adjustments will be undertaken soon, it should be urgent to envisage an assessment of the errors which have been made, to be able to reflect about how to protect the ecological an the development of the rural societies in this region. A Regional Schema of Development is elaborating with lots of difficulties. Negotiations have provisionally stopped because of discords between the Malian state, the Office of Niger and the AFD (French Agency of Development).
