Cybergeo, the electronic European Journal of Geography, is intended to promote faster communication of research and greater direct contact between authors and readers. Created with the aim of encouraging the exchange of ideas, methods and results, it publishes in any european language. It deals with the entire range of geographical concerns and interests, with no preferences for any particular school or theme. A high scientific standard is ensured by submitting articles to an international committee of readers. By hosting discussion and mailing list the journal aims to stimulate open debate and intellectual exchange. Access to the published articles is facilitated by a system of headings and key-words. For as long as is possible, access will be kept unrestricted and free of charge.
CYBERGEO is intended as a response to the specific needs of academic communication, by offering the possibility of a rapid exchange of information, immediate feedback on articles and events relevant to geography, on-going discussions, the latest research on specific questions, offers of results or documents, information about the availability of maps, and so on. CYBERGEO aims to be an instrument for networking the geographical community, as well as helping to increase the external visibility of the discipline.
In addition to the journal itself, a services heading offers a range of geographical information (data bases, servers, journal summaries, and so on).
The submitted article must be original and not been submitted to another journal at the same time. The different files, text and illustrations, have to remain all anonymous until the final agreement for publication.
Presentation of articles Articles are submitted for approval by an editorial committee using the following procedure:
Authors send their manuscript to the journal's office by E-mail: cybergeo@parisgeo.cnrs.fr
The article is presented to the Editorial Committee and two members are in charge to read it and give their appreciation.
After discussion by the Editorial Committee, a summary of this information (acceptance or rejection, requests for changes or additions) is sent to the author, who can then return a modified version of the article to the editorial office.
Accepted articles are then published on-line and can be consulted without restriction on the server. Although the electronic medium is best suited to short articles, for more substantial articles the journal does accept texts of 20-30 pages.
Title in the original language, in English and in French
Name, E-mail address, and qualifications of authors
Summaries and key-words in the original language, in English and in French
Text (preferably Microsoft Word PC or Mac format, or failing this ASCII).
Graphics and maps (preferably GIF format or failing this JPG)
Articles put on line are dated and classified by a number of the journal (each article forms a single issue). The author can give its reference in a bibliography by quoting CYBERGEO European Geographical Review, plus the year, issue, and number of pages (size A4 on the printer).
This reference is given on each page of the article, and so will appear on any paper copies that a reader may make. This safeguard protects the copyright, providing that the network users respect the established practice. The date on which the cybertext was received appears at the end of the article.
What makes the electronic medium so valuable is its capacity to allow an exchange of information or reactions to articles published on line. Anyone with comments about an article can contact the author directly at their electronic address, or with the person in charge of the section or with the editorial office. This procedure is particularly useful for reporting errors or the omission of important references dealing with the subject under review. The editorial committee will inform the author and discuss with them any changes or additions to their article.
Should you wish to develop a general interest discussion on the subject examined by an author, you can also contribute to the Eurotqg mailing list so as to open a debate. A summary of the replies to your question may be compiled later by the person in charge of that section and may be put on-line at the end of the article.
To subscribe to the Eurotqg mailing list, apply by electronic mail to eurotqg@unil.ch giving simply the command " Eurotqg Your Name " (eg Eurotqg John Smith) as your message text.
