In April 2006 Cybergeo reaches its tenth anniversary. This is a short lifetime in comparison with many geographical journals, but it is considerable for an electronic journal. Thus we can celebrate: we were the first, and we value our seniority! Our outreach is increasing, with more than 2500 visits a day and 30% more from year to year. We are therefore confident for the future, and we can look back over these ten years’ experience to see what can be learnt.
The success of Cybergeo arises from its ability to provide free access to scientific information, the quality of which is monitored by an international editorial team. Thus our journal has an A ranking from French universities and CNRS, as well as in other countries. Cybergeo is referenced in international databases like Scopus, or libraries like that of the London School of Economics and South African universities.
The stature of Cybergeo is being reinforced with new European partnerships. Several geo-science journals have opted for developing cyberlink packages with us (see home page), we provide information on the activities of the European research group S4 (Simulation Spatiale pour les Sciences Sociales - 4S – Spatial Simulation for Social Services, see the Services link), and we are entering into collaboration with the portal revues.org, which, with the arrival of Cybergeo, is opening up to multilingual journals. This will make it possible to offer a new presentation in autumn 2006 (the present presentation dates from 2002). With its selection of geographical websites, journal summaries, thesis abstracts in English, and conference and seminar announcements, Cybergeo provides an overview of the geographer’s world.
An electronic journal also means interactivity. Hypergeo, the encyclopaedia of geographical concepts piloted by Bernard Elissalde, is accessible via our Services link. This encyclopaedia, in which numerous authors collaborate and deliberate to reach a consensus on definitions, offers, by way of hypertext links, a comprehensive view of contemporary geography in several languages. The Spanish version has been particularly successful. There is room for comment and debate, in just the same way as with Cybergeo (and not only via the “points chauds” (hot spot) link!).
Celebrating this decade of existence also means expressing thanks to all those, whether in the limelight or in the background, who have contributed to this success: CNRS which has made people available, the Géographie-Cités laboratory which accommodates them, the pluri-national editorial committee (too many to enumerate by name, but the list is given in our home page), the whole editorial team, and all the young graduates who have spared their time to give life to the journal. And, naturally, the researchers who produce good geography. Happy anniversary to all these, and to our readers.
