PONE-D-17-27459
Calibration of a Density-based Model of Urban Morphogenesis
PLOS ONE

Dear Dipl. Ing. Raimbault,

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.

The manuscript has been evaluated by three reviewers, their comments are available below. The reviewers have raised a few issues that they feel a revised submission should address. In particular they have requested additional information on methodological aspects of the study, and they have recommended that you have your manuscript proofread to improve the overall scientific readability. Please revise the manuscript to carefully address the concerns raised.

We would appreciate receiving your revised manuscript by Mar 10 2018 11:59PM. When you are ready to submit your revision, log on to https://pone.editorialmanager.com/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter.

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols

Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). This letter should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. This file should be uploaded as separate file and labeled 'Manuscript'.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.

Kind regards,

Carla Pegoraro
Associate Editor
PLOS ONE

Journal Requirements:

When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
 
* Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and http://www.journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf




[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?

The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 

Reviewer #2: Yes

Reviewer #3: Yes

Reviewer #4: Yes
 

2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 

Reviewer #2: Yes

Reviewer #3: Yes

Reviewer #4: Yes
 

3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.

Reviewer #2: Yes

Reviewer #3: Yes

Reviewer #4: Yes
 

4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?

PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.

Reviewer #2: No

Reviewer #3: Yes

Reviewer #4: Yes
 

5. Review Comments to the Author

Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)

Reviewer #2: 1. The interaction between aggregation and diffusion determines the morphological dimension of urban growth processes. Then, how to classify the interaction into the degrees and types?
2. Page 9, line 92: I assume that the author means “50-100km” for the mesoscopic scale rather than “50 100km.” Then, what are the ranges for microscopic and macroscopic scales corresponding to this study?
3. The choice of upper limits for model parameters in Table 1 is without explanation.
4. Page 11, line 143: I assume that the author means “ε = 1 means that the population is uniformly distributed” rather than “ε = 0.”
5. Page 14, Caption in Figure 2: The values for total population and growth rate in rural area are larger than those in intermediate settlements.
6. Some equations are not numbered.
7. Some of the citation and the list of references do not meet the standards.

Reviewer #3: This paper proposes a parcimonious model for describing at meso-scale the spatial distribution of urban growth including two antagonistic abstract processes of aggregation and sprawl. The importance of this contribution is that besides the abstract model simulating urban morphogenesis there is an attempt to validate it on a significant set of empirical data, encompassing 500 urban areas in Europe and using a dedicated measurement method for comparing observed and simulated urban forms. It represents also a considerable computational work and a remarkable example of a complete and open exploration of a model, the data and experiments are made available. To my opinion the paper is ready for publication (after correcting a few spelling errors) and it should be promoted on the PLOS site.
The paper relies first on an updated state of the art in quantitative geography including cellular automata and fractals. The central part of the model that includes five parameters only is a process of population growth over a grid including a mechanism of preferential attachment and a local diffusion effect. The model written in Netlogo and Scala is used first for generating a variety of theoretical shapes (whose ability of morphological indicators to differentiate the configurations is tested) and the OpenMole simulation platform is used for fully exploring the parameter space before it is calibrated on the European spatial distribution of population densities.
Spelling errors: On line 143 there is a spelling mistake to be corrected: E = 0 means that all the population is in one cell whereas E = 0 means that…and Line 238 write gives (instead of giver), line 247 values (instead of valued)

Reviewer #4: Manuscript number: PONE-D-17-27459
Manuscript title: Calibration of a Density-based Model of Urban Morphogenesis

The above-referred paper develops an interesting model for generating different urban morphologies based on two mechanisms of diffusion and aggregation. The model behavior is controlled over European countries and calibration results and model outputs are provided in a brief and succinct manner. I think the paper is well-organized and well-written (despite some minor language errors) and it adds to the literature. I recommend publication of the paper subject to a minor revision.

1. Introduction: Majority of the cited works belong to more than a decade ago. Please update the manuscript in terms of the recent studies in the literature. For example, the following papers use the concepts of diffusion and aggregation (i.e. diffusion-coalescence or centralization-decentralization) to explain the process of urban growth at finer scales compared to your study.

Sakieh, Y., & Salmanmahiny, A. (2016). Treating a cancerous landscape: Implications from medical sciences for urban and landscape planning in a developing region. Habitat International, 55, 180–191.

Dietzel, C., Oguz, H., Hemphill, J. J., Clarke, K. C., & Gazulis, N. (2005). Diffusion and coalescence of the Houston Metropolitan Area: evidence supporting a new urban theory. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 32(2), 231–246.

2. Materials and Methods: this section is very well explained. Please provide a flowchart and describe the major steps of the study.
3. Discussion: Please discuss the main findings of your study and functionality of your model compared to recent studies and models in the literature.
4. Please highlight the practical applications of the diffusion-aggregation model at a continental scale.
5. Please clearly explain the sensitivity analysis of the model in a separate section.
6. Figures and tables are of very good quality. Well done!
7. The paper is overall well-written; however, there are some minor language errors. English proof-reading in terms of the following items is recommended:
- absence of articles where they are required
- errors of common English usage
- failure to use the possessive case when it is needed
- clash of singular and plural in the same sentence
- wrong choice of words
- proper of capitalization.
 

6. If you would like your identity to be revealed to the authors, please include your name here (optional).

Your name and review will not be published with the manuscript. 

Reviewer #2: (No Response)

Reviewer #3: (No Response)

Reviewer #4: (No Response)



[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files to be viewed.]


While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, http://pace.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
