This paper represents part of an on-going research project which considers the effects by which individual persons (notably, consumers of durable goods) might be misrepresented by geodemographic- or lifestyles-typologies (described below) and also how non-random method of data collection may lead to processes of 'social exclusion' in a virtual world of digital 'facts' and figures. The present discussion is intended as a 'stepping-stone' towards these considerations, a contextual framework in which the wider research is embedded. As such the scope of this paper is contained within two aims : firstly - in part 1 - describing and theorising the formation of geodemographic typologies (Geodemographic Information Systems, GDIS), contrasting this against the emergent lifestyles approach; and secondly - in part 2 - illustrating the problems of mis- or inaccurate representation which these two approaches can introduce.
Brown (1991) argues that geodemographics is a shorthand label for "both the development and the application of area typologies that have proved to be discriminators of consumer behaviour and aids to 'market analysis'" (emphasis added). The applications are in retail site analysis, store location, market research, credit rating and target marketing. The reader’s attention is drawn to Batey and Brown (1995) for a full discussion of the history and growth of geodemographics.
Recent UK typologies were derived by grouping the 147,000 1991 Census Enumeration Districts, EDs, (or Scottish Output Areas) into a number of clusters. Aggregating these clusters into larger cluster-groups forms layers of aggregation of which there may be two-to-three. For example, CACI LTD’s ‘ACORN’ has 3 layers :
1) 54 cluster 'Types'
2) 17 cluster 'Groups'
3) 6 cluster 'Categories'
From the set of 147,000 the clustering algorithm identifies and merges the two EDs that are at closest distance together, d, in n-dimensional space, where 'n' is the number of cluster-formative variables derived for each ED from the 1991 Census Small Area Statistics (SAS). The algorithm is commonly the orthogonal and Euclidean (non-weighted) case of Pythagoras’ theorem in n-dimensions :
where
[ 1 ]
and EDx and EDy are the two closest EDs of the UK-wide set. There are no contiguity constraints. Clustering continues by re-calculating the (mean) cluster-formative variables for the new cluster. Then, the ED-to-ED or cluster-to-ED (or, later on in the procedure, cluster-to-cluster) pair that are now closest are merged. By repetition of these stages the desired number of clusters is reached, given that geodemographic typologies are (after Curry, 1993) both :
i) mutually exclusive - every ED belongs to one and only one cluster at any given layer; and,
ii) collectively exhaustive - every ED belongs to a cluster (or is ‘flagged’ as being two distinct to be grouped to a cluster (Brown and Batey, 1994).
The aim of the clustering procedure can be understood as an attempt to delimit a broadly homogenous social-economic landscape, albeit fragmented above the level of the basic ‘building-block’ of the procedure, the ED (Figure 1).

cluster 1 cluster 2 cluster 3
Figure 1 - Idealised grouping of 16 EDs into 3 social-economic landscapes
"The theory of geodemographics is based on the fact that similar people tend to cluster together and households in the same postcode sector [or ED] … can be placed in the same category" (Foley, 1997). Two assumptions underlie the theory and are now discussed in turn :
(a) ED boundaries enclose a broadly homogenous social-economic environment (therefore, EDs can be grouped together on the basis of aggregate Census measures to produce a homogenous social-economic landscape, see above).
The smallest areal unit for which abundant UK Census data is available and geo-referenced is that of the ED (or Output Area, in Scotland), disseminated as the Small Area Statistics (SAS). However, EDs are not the ‘natural areas’ of the Chicago School and of human ecology : geographical units distinguished both by physical individuality and by the social, economic and cultural characteristics of the population (Gittus, 1964). Rather, EDs are defined administratively to even the work loads of Census enumerators. There is no emphatic claim for within-area homogeneity, although a study by Mitchell et al., 1996, concludes that the ‘GB Profiler’ geodemographic typology (Openshaw and Blake, undated) does give plausible whole ED-summaries.
 (b) The "fundamental precept of geodemography is … that households living in the same neighborhood tend to share buying habits, product preferences and other elements of consumer behaviour" (Curry, op. cit., emphasis added).
CCN Marketing’s ‘MOSAIC’ and CDMS LTD’s ‘Super Profiles’ typologies both incorporate non-Census data within their design. However, an inspection of the Technical Note 2 for Super Profiles (Brown and Batey, 1995) underlines Birkin’s (1995) contention that it is the 1991 SAS data that provides the focal point. Only 10 non-Census variables (derived from the electoral register - a register compiled by local authorities of those persons who are eligible to vote, by their address) are cluster-formative against 69 variables derived from the SAS. The 140 ‘TGI’-based variables (and a further 51 SAS and 10 electoral roll variables) identified as being assembled for the typology are secondary, cluster-descriptive variables. The TGI (Target Group Index) is a regular survey of the consumer habits and preferences of 25,000 UK households. Using this data brings a more ‘qualitative feel’ to the pen pictures - the verbal descriptions of individual clusters, as below :
Lifestyle E [LS5] : Urban Venturers
This cosmopolitan, multiracial group resides in areas of major cities which are undergoing gentrification but still retain a significant proportion of poorer quality housing.
These young adults live in terraced houses or flats and have high levels of disposable income, which is spent on eating out, expensive holidays, keeping fit, going to pubs, clubs, concerts and the cinema. Close to where the action is, there is little need for a car, the bus, tube and train are preferred means of transport.
They read about their interests in magazines such as Time Out and Cosmopolitan and keep us to date with more current affairs in the more liberal broadsheets, The Guardian and The Independent.
 (From the Super Profile Lifestyle Pen Pictures, CDMS Limited, 1994)
An association is made between individual consumer behaviours and the wider social-economic environment within which the consumer resides. This assumption need imply neither a purely behaviourist and positivist stance nor a purely materialistic conception. Demographic, economic and physical criteria do not totally classify and explain the social individual. Nonetheless, if consumer behaviours, choices and preferences are allied to the idea of ‘lifestyle’, then the geodemographic ontology is nearer that of Max Weber than Alfred Adler. Lifestyle is more a socially instituted conformity than an outward expression of the psychological (Cathelat, 1990).
Geodemographics practice supposes that ‘birds of a feather stick together’. Wrigley (1995) cites Steel (1985, unpublished) to offer three generalised explanations as to how this clustering should occur.
i) Through the operation of some ‘process’ occurring either when the groups were forming or through migration. Similar individuals or households are constrained by the operation of the housing market, or chose to migrate into certain areas;
ii) Because all individuals within the group or area may be subject to and affected by the same ‘external forces’. For example, present ‘contextual variables’ or those of the past with lingering effects;
iii) As a result of individuals interacting with each other and influencing each other. The frequency and strength of such interactions are likely to be greater between individuals in the same area than between individuals in different areas.
Macintyre (1997) distinguishes between : composition, the characteristics of the people who occupy the place, which are independent of the place; collective, the way that these people generate a collective identity or function collectively; and context, the characteristics of the place rather than the individuals. These distinctions help to clarify the discussion, although reality muddles conceptual clarity :
the behaviour of individuals in space together contribute to the development of places over time, and these place effects in turn condition subsequent spatial behaviour - what Thrift (1981) has termed the ‘active’ and ‘reactive’ traditions, respectively, in behavioural geography (Longley and Batty, 1996).
Geodemography assumes that group behaviours are (partially) clustered and associated with the social-economic landscape. Hence, the measurement and delimitation of varying contexts may be a proxy to the demarcation of differing collectives as cluster ‘types’. It remains to be determined whether such collectives, or ‘consumer localities’ exist (see Duncan and Savage, 1989; Cooke, 1989; and Warde, 1989 for a summary of locality-theory). It is, though, extremely unlikely that either EDs themselves are adequately homogenous, or that EDs within a cluster do not differ so sufficiently that to infer the characteristics of an individual from the characteristics of a subjectively-defined area (or cluster) will not risk the ecological fallacy - the inappropriate ascription of the characteristics of areal data to individuals and point locations within those areas. The problem of using geodemographics is one of ‘representativeness’ when such an inappropriate ascription is either knowingly or unwittingly made. Yet, often marketeers are concerned to ‘target’ or ‘profile’ actual individuals as potential consumers of their business products or services. The ‘solution’ has increasingly been to turn to the growth industry of ‘lifestyles’ databases and marketing.
Data pooled from the registration guarantees of durable goods (for example cameras and vacuum cleaners) or from questionnaires directly distributed to households can be stored and referenced to the individual level. This, the emerging lifestyles approach, avoids the need to infer from the place to the person. Individuals, whose recent consumer behaviours are known to conform to chosen criteria, may be targeted as the desired recipients of ‘junk mail’ (Birkin, 1995). The focus is shifted from the context-collective to the composition-collective.
Other applications can be geographical, creating custom-designed spatial typologies based upon single or multiple variables that are of direct interest. Noting that the data is updated regularly unlike that of the decennial Census, then "for any commercial (or indeed non-commercial) application, a general purpose [geodemographic] system is likely to be inferior to [a lifestyles] one designed specifically for the purpose" (Flowerdew, 1991). An important caveat is that
… lifestyle data still only give partial coverage of the population and important consumer groups may be under-represented [‘non-consumer’ groups more so!]. The largest database claims to have included more than 50 per cent of the population nationally (Winters, 1997)
[N.B. By November, 1997 Claritas UK were claiming to cover 75% of UK households with 100% accuracy, the characteristics of the remaining 25% being estimated using predicative modelling at 70% accuracy! (Reed, 1997)].
Of the 50 per cent (above), the proportion for which information is recorded across the entire set of variables may be small, reducing the coverage substantially. There are ‘holes’ in the datasets : you can choose to ignore some or all of the questions. Consequently, the data from the sample may not be representative of the population at large, the recourse to ‘self-selection’ not conforming to the rigours of established sampling theories and practices (and allowing opportunities to ‘play the system’ or to mislead).
By avoiding area-based inferences for individual-level analyses, the lifestyles approach may avoid the ecological fallacy. However, it may not be said that the problem of representation is avoided all together. Moser and Kalton (1985) write that two major principles underlie all sample design of which the second, the desire to avoid bias in the selection procedure, is of immediate relevancy.
Bias in the selection can arise : (i) if the sampling is done by a non-random method, which generally means that the selection is consciously or unconsciously influenced by human choice; (ii) if the sampling frame (list, index or other population record) which serves as the basis for selection does not cover the population adequately, completely or accurately; (iii) if some sections of the population are impossible to find or refuse to co-operate (ibid.).
Some lifestyles data is collated from the return of product guarantee returns, necessarily biasing the data towards those who are buying durable goods. Other data is obtained from the distribution of consumer questionnaires to addresses by means of the Electoral Register. This excludes those ineligible to vote (including those aged under 18 years and non-UK citizens) and is also unable to distinguish between those households which share the same address (i.e. HMOs, Households in Multiple Occupation). Finally, those individuals who receive a lifestyles questionnaire can still choose to ignore it, raising the possibility that some sub-sections of the population are more prone to returning the questionnaire than others. The concern is whether the non-random methods of data collection conspire to leave the lifestyles data non-representative of certain individuals.
So which is better? Geodemographic typologies are a multi-purpose tool that may be applied to a variety of marketing applications. They are spatially replete and consequently better suited to geographic analyses than their lifestyles counterparts. On the other hand, a lifestyles system excels by storing disaggregate information upon consumer behaviours, avoiding the need for inference from the place. Here, however, there is a risk of treating the consumer as an ‘atomistic individual’ living in a social vacuum, focusing attention upon the compositional where the collective or the context may also be of interest.
The Census remains the most spatially extensive and representative source of social-economic data available in the UK It is also extremely expensive for commercial users to obtain! Within our purportedly ‘data-rich’ digital world there is the temptation to use data ‘on the fly’ - to acquire data of unknown reliability and then to see what can be done with it. This is counter to the traditions of (idealised) scientific practice where the formulation of the research problem proceeds the choice of data collection method and where the data collection is undertaken according to the rigours of sampling theory and tested through the use of pilot studies (Goodchild and Longley, forthcoming). Whilst one may be cautious about an ability to ‘quantify error’, the established social survey research design does facilitate the use of statistical checks by which the validity of the data can be estimated and the nature of bias be assessed.
Both the geodemographic and lifestyles methods have their strengths and weaknesses. As a second quotation from Winters (1997) notes :
Geodemographics and lifestyle data have traditionally been thought of as offering alternative approaches to target marketing … Lifestyle data appeared in the mid-80s as a radical alternative, particularly for targeted direct mail. Now, ten years on, the picture is a lot more confused … More information is needed on both types of data to decide when to use one or the other, either individually or in combination (emphasis added).
The study area - broadly corresponding to the ‘BS6’ postcode sector of Bristol, shown in Figure 2 (where wealth broadly increases from light to dark colouring) - is used to illustrate the notions of ‘representativeness’ introduced in Part 1. In Section 2.1 a lifestyles dataset is introduced with discussion upon its content and format. Particular attention is given to the problem of ‘non-response’ and to the difficulty of matching the records to the 1991 Census geography. In Section 2.2 an analysis is made of the lifestyles sample vis-à-vis the Census, by age, sex and social-economic group (SEG), to query whether particular groups are over- or under-represented within the lifestyles data. Thirdly, in Section 2.3, a multilevel methodology is employed in a preliminary investigation into the ability of a geodemographic typology to discriminate between newspaper readership preferences in the region.

Figure 2 - The 'BS6' study region
The commercially-available lifestyles dataset, of which the BS6 data is a subset, has been collated from individuals' replies to survey questionnaires distributed, by Royal Mail, over 6 weeks from the 4th September to 15th October, 1996. The sampling frame was the Electoral Register (as of October 1995 and thus a year out of date by the close of the survey), excluding those Register entries where there were more than three different surnames per address (effectively, Housing in Multiple Occupation). Wherever possible the questionnaires were addressed to a female resident (conflicting with UK Census notions of the male as the head of household). 20 million questionnaires were distributed across Great Britain (excludes Northern Ireland) of which 2 million were returned (10%).
The dataset contains 406 variables recording information ranging from age, sex, family income, type of job and household size; to personal interests, which charities are supported, holiday preferences and home improvements. A ‘Y’ indicates a positive response to a question, for example : ‘I read the Daily Mail newspaper?’. A blank space indicates no response. That may mean the respondent does not read the paper but could also mean the question has been ignored. Similarly, the questionnaire is structured such that the question ‘Do you have any of the following credit cards’ allows responses indicating possession of Access, Barclaycard, MBNA Bank or other but does not permit the response ‘I have no credit card.’ It is impossible to be certain whether a lack of response to this question indicates that the respondent has no credit card or simply doesn’t want to reveal their credit details.
Operating within the boundaries of the 1984 UK Data Protection Act the dataset contains the unit postcode (henceforth ‘postcode’) of each lifestyles respondent but not their actual address. To allow comparison with the Census an intermediate stage is required, matching the postcodes to EDs.
Figure 3a illustrates the simplest case where a unit postcode is wholly within one ED and thus one cluster (recalling that it is the grouping of EDs that is constitutive of a geodemographic cluster). The postcodes are shown as polygons for illustrative purposes although they are really one-dimensional routes along which post is delivered. Unfortunately, postcodes need not nest hierarchically and exactly within EDs but may straddle their borders. This eventuality is shown in Figure 3b, noting that in reality postcodes may cross more than a single border. Of the 899 postcodes included in the study region, 187 (21%) are in two or more EDs. This begets the question of how to assign the lifestyles respondents (for whom only the postcode is known) to an ED?

Figure 3 - Associating postcodes with EDs and clusters
The postcode-to-ED directory gives the proportions by which the total number of households within a single postcode are distributed between multiple EDs. As a matter of convenience the BS6 postcodes were treated as fully located within one ED or another, locating the postcodes to the EDs on an essentially ‘first-come-first-served’ basis : the postcode was allocated to the first ED recorded in the file. A more accurate method is to allocate the postcodes to their ‘Pseudo-ED’ - the ED in which the majority of postcode’s population falls (Martin, op. Cit.). In Figure 3b the two EDs belong to the same cluster. The method by which postcodes are allocated to EDs (above) would, in this instance, make no difference to subsequent statistics averaged over the cluster, although measures of variation between EDs within the cluster will be affected. In Figure 3c the postcode is split across two EDs and two clusters. Both ED-average and cluster-average statistics may be affected by the allocation choice. Across the study region, 101 (11%) of the postcodes are split between clusters.
The area understood as ‘BS6’ was derived firstly by selecting all the BS6 postcodes, then identifying all the EDs (‘BS6 EDs’) in which those postcodes are either fully or partly located. Subsequently, all the other (non-BS6) postcodes that are either fully or partly located within the ‘BS6 EDs’ were included (Figure 4). The case study area, ‘BS6’, is therefore larger than the postcode sector BS6 with a small amount of overlap outside from the ‘BS6 EDs’.

Figure 4 - Forming the study area ‘BS6’
Table 1 of the 1991 Census Small Area Statistics (SAS), is the classification of individuals by employment status, age group and by sex (OPCS, 1992; also in Openshaw, 1995). This may be specifically derived for the ‘BS6 EDs’ using the data held for registered users at MIDAS (http ://www.midas.ac.uk/). The count per cell is calculated as a percentage of the sum of the counts across all the cells (upper line of cells, Table 1). A comparable table can be derived using the Lifestyles data (lower lines, Table 1). It is assumed that the 16-24 column is comparable to an 18-24 age grouping and that all those individuals indicating themselves to be students are economically inactive.

Table 1 - ‘Weights matrix’ for 'BS6'
(Source : The 1991 Census, Crown Copyright. ESRC Purchase)
The Census is representative of the population by age, gender and employment. Notwithstanding inaccuracies arising from ‘data blurring’ and the ‘mission millions’ (Openshaw, 1995) the SAS data is the mark by which the sampling biases of the lifestyles data can be assessed. In Table 1 the symbol indicates an over-representation of a given category of people by the lifestyles data vis-à-vis the Census and the symbol an under-representation. An over-representation (under-representation) is defined as indicating a weight less than (greater than) or equal to 0.7 (1.4) and a difference between the SAS and Lifestyles percentage values of magnitude greater than 0.2. It is shown that of the male lifestyles respondents residing in ‘BS6’ there is an under-representation of the 18-24 and 25-34 age groups, particularly of the younger employees and students (this area adjoining Bristol University). Conversely, there is an over-representation of the elder employed (45+) and the retired. A less succinct but broadly comparable pattern emerges for the female respondents of ‘BS6’.
To make the lifestyles data representative of the actual population the individual responses may be weighted by age, sex and employment. A weight is obtained for each sub-group (table cell) as the division of the SAS value by the lifestyles value (shown in bold-type). A departure from unity (1.0) indicates an under-representation (>1.0) or an over-representation (<1.0). The symbol indicates a weight of over two which may be considered ‘dangerous’. Where this symbol appears the lifestyles data sample is of half or less of the sub-group’s population. As the weight increases (exponentially) the assumption that the sample population is representative of the entire population is ‘pinned’ on the evidence from fewer and fewer (sampled) persons. Concurrently, the likelihood of the ecological fallacy occurring is increasing.
Overall and in terms of sampling, the lifestyles data does seem to be broadly representative of a large body of consumers : employees (male or female) aged from 25 to about 55, with a degree of over-representation in the 45-54 age group. It is less representative of the young, a group whose personal disposable income may well be high, and of the younger unemployed - perhaps indicative of the suspicion that Lifestyles data is less suited to applications beyond the world of durable goods. Current research is seeking to analyse, by ED, the ‘representativeness’ of lifestyles data across the urban region of Bristol, to search for evidence of systematic bias corresponding (or otherwise) to the general results of Table 1.
Table 2 gives the percentage of Target Group Index (TGI) respondents reading the daily newspapers, averaged for each of ten geodemographic clusters at the time of their derivation (circa 1993/4). The typology is the ‘Lifestyles’ layer of the ‘Super Profiles’ geodemographic system. These clusters shall henceforth be referred to as LS1 to LS10 to avoid confusion with lifestyles data.
In forming the Super Profiles typology similar global averages were calculated by cluster for a total of 120 Census-, 20 electoral roll- and 140 TGI-based variables, numerically describing the social-economic environment at the cluster level and the aggregated consumer preferences of the resident populations. A selection of these variables were chosen by marketeers to form ‘snappy’, pen pictures of the clusters. Those sentences which make explicit reference to newspaper preferences have been extracted from the complete set of Super Profiles’ pen pictures (below).

Table 2 - Percentage of TGI respondents reading daily newspapers in each geodemographic cluster
Geodemographic Pen Pictures (Newspapers)
LS1 - Affluent Achievers
"Investments are followed closely in broadsheets, such as the Financial Times, The Times and The Telegraph."
LS2 - Thriving Greys
"The Thriving Greys read the broadsheets..."
LS3 - Settled Suburbans
"Typical publications read include The Daily Mail, The Express, Ideal Home and Family Circle."
LS4 - Nest Builders
"Tabloids [‘mid-sheets’] and, in particular, Today [no longer printed] are the Nest Builders chosen newspapers"
LS5 - Urban Venturers
"... keep up to date with current affairs in the more liberal broadsheets, The Guardian and TheIndependent."
LS6 - Country Life
"... broadsheets, including The Telegraph, are popular."
LS7 - Senior Citizens
"Of all the groups the Senior Citizens are the least likely to read newspapers and the popular magazines."
LS8 - Producers
"The Sun, The Mirror and the News of the World are the most popular newspapers."
LS9 - Hard-Pressed Families
"Tabloids, particularly The Sun, The Mirror and The Daily Record are their chosen papers."
LS10 - ‘Have-Nots’
"The Sun and The Mirror are the most popular newspapers"
 (based upon extracts from the Super Profiles pen pictures; Brown and Batey, 1994; Batey and Brown, 1995)
Cathelat (1990) argues that the pen picture for a given cluster should be interpreted relative to other clusters. Where the population of LS1 is characterised as reading the Financial Times, The Times and The Telegraph broadsheets this need not imply that all the population read one or more of these papers, or even that a majority of the population do. It implies that, all things being equal, there is a higher probability that Times (etc.) readers will be found in cluster LS1 than any other cluster. Table 1 confirms this to be true (28% TGI respondents compared with 19% in LS2 and so forth). However, Cathelat adds that the characteristic by which the cluster is defined should also be the most prevalent case within that cluster. Relating this to LS1 then the Times (etc.) should be the most widely read papers within the cluster. Table 1 suggests they are not : the ‘mid-sheets’ (Daily Express, Daily Mail and Today) are equally or more widely read within LS1. Again, where LS5 is characterised as reading The Guardian and The Independent,it is true that these papers are more widely read in this cluster than any other but the tabloids are more popular!
The mis-representations of the aggregate characteristics of clusters by marketeers is an ecological fallacy of sorts (Birkin, 1995). The ecological fallacy - here understood as the mis-representation of individuals by their portrayal from aggregate(d) variables - may also be manifest if the TGI sample is not representative of the cluster populations.
As a provisional test to the notion of a geodemographic typology being able to discriminate between consumer habits and preferences, a sub-sample of the lifestyle dataset (referenced to the Census geography by the postcode-ED directory) was used to establish a multilevel logit model estimating :
for each ‘BS6 ED,’ the probability that a daily newspaper reading lifestyles respondent would read a broadsheet paper, given their reading habits and those of other daily newspaper reading respondents living in the same ED;
how much the probability of reading a broadsheet varies between ‘BS6 EDs’ belonging to the same cluster group.
The analysis was of those respondents who have positively indicated to be reading at least one daily newspaper (85% of the total respondents for whom age, sex and economic position are known). Since some attention has been given to this section of the lifestyles questionnaire it is reasonable to suppose that a ‘non-positive’ response (that is, no tick) indicates that the individual does not read that particular newspaper rather than that the question has been ignored. A weights matrix almost identical to Table 1 was derived for the sub-sample. This indicated that the sampling distributions of daily newspaper readers by economic position, age and sex are proportionally the same as the distributions over the entire dataset. The analysis considers only those respondents who are known to be employed, unemployed, students or retired (and who read daily newspapers). It is implicitly assumed that those individuals who are neither students nor retired have either full- or part-time jobs, or are unemployed; and that access to newspapers does not significantly differ between clusters.
The principles of multilevel modelling are outlined in Jones and Bullen (1994), Goldstein (1995), Jones and Duncan (1996) and Woodhouse (1996), among others. Here, level 1 is specified as the individual respondent, i (one of 1538), located within one and only one of 92 ‘BS6 EDs’ (j) at the level 2. From Table 3 it should be noted that that none of the ‘BS6 EDs’ are grouped into either the LS6 or LS9 clusters and that there is only 1 ED in each of the clusters LS3, LS4 and LS8. There are 3 EDs in LS10 but difficulties were encountered whilst estimating their between-ED (level 2) variance.

Table 3 - Sample size within each geodemographic cluster
Expressed simply, it is being queried whether  ij (probability of an individual, i, in ED, j, reading a particular newspaper type)is a function of the geodemographic category :
? [ 2 ]
 ‘Broadsheet readers’ are considered to be those who read The Telegraph, The Times or the Financial Times (as opposed to TheGuardian or The Independent). From the geodemographic pen pictures and from Table 2 it was anticipated that propensity to read the broadsheets would be highest in EDs grouped to clusters LS1 and LS2.
Figure 5 shows that after the unusually high propensity within the single ED of LS3 the reading of these papers is highest in LS1 where, on average, nearly 50% (± 25%) of the sample read the broadsheets. The propensity is also high in LS2 at over 40% (± 20%). However, this is marginally less than in the single ED of LS4 and does not seem to differ greatly from LS5 at approximately 40% (±20%). It can be formally tested whether the level 2 variance (variation in propensity to read the broadsheets between within-cluster EDs) differs by cluster. For the pair of clusters LS1 and LS2, this test gives a chi-square (χ 2) for which the probability of the value having not been obtained by chance is 0.37. For LS1 & LS5 it is 0.40 and for LS2 & LS5 it is 0.0. This suggests that whilst average propensity to read broadsheets is relatively high for daily newspaper readers in LS1 and LS2 there is little to distinguish these clusters from LS5 (and possibly LS4).
Figure 6 and Figure 7 show that broadsheets are, on average, the most read type of newspaper in both LS1 and LS2 although the absolute propensity averages less than half of the sample population. Indeed, consideration of the level 2 variance, shown in Figure 6 as the distance between the upper and lower lines, suggests it may be more robust to suggest that ‘Affluent Achievers closely follow their investments in the mid-sheets’ (compare with Table 2), although the narrowing of the variance is also due to an incresed sample size (therefore, decreased standard deviation). Here, tabloid newspapers are defined as The Sun, The Mirror and The Star; the ‘mid-sheets’ as The Daily Mail and The Express.
The preliminary results suggest it is partially true that
[ 2]
At the regional level of ‘BS6’ the geodemographic classification can be used to identify those EDs where the probability that broadsheets are read is highest. Yet, the within-cluster, ED variation in propensity to read the broadsheets is high (of the order ± 20 to ± 25%). The ‘broad brush’ partitioning of the sample population into distinct geodemographic ‘types’ is not clearly reflected by reality : cluster-average readership levels of greater than 30% for the broadsheets can be found in LS1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7!

Figure 5 - Propensity to read a daily ‘broadsheet’ by cluster group

Figure 6 - Preferred reading in LS1 (% and rank)

Figure 7 - Preferred reading in LS2 (% and rank)
Propensity to read the (more) ‘liberal broadsheets’ (The Guardian and The Independent) was anticipated to be high in LS5 particularly and in LS1 or LS2 (from Table 2 and also the pen pictures). Figure 8 shows that the single ED of LS3 has an unusually high propensity to read this newspaper type (<50%). The propensity in LS10 is also higher than in LS5, LS2 or LS1 at 48% compared with 37% (± 15%), 31% (±18%) and 26% (±17 to 33%), respectively.
Figure 9 indicates that in LS5 propensity to read the liberal broadsheets is equal to the propensity to read the other broadsheets although with slightly less level 2 variance in the first instance. In LS1 the liberal broadsheets are less widely read than the other broadsheets or the mid-sheets (Figure 3), whilst in LS2 the liberal broadsheets are slightly less widely read than the other broadsheets (Figure 7).
The level 2 variance is approximately equal to ±20% in LS2 and LS5 which is reflected in the formal test formal test using the r-test and chi-square procedure. This suggests that there is little to differentiate LS2 and LS5 with regard the reading of liberal broadsheets (χ 2<50%).

Figure 8 - Propensity to read a daily ‘liberal broadsheet’ by cluster group

Figure 9 - Preferred reading in LS5 (% and rank)
As with the analysis for The Telegraph, The Times and the Financial Times, the analysis of the more liberal broadsheets does suggest an ‘association’ between propensity to buy the broadsheets and the geodemographic category within which an ED is located. However, this association is ambiguous and the discriminatory power of the geodemographic typology is vague. It is within these ill-defined boundaries of representation and behavioural clustering that geodemographic systems are able to operate at an efficiency acceptable to the (low) demands of commercial users. It is more questionable whether they are suited to the ‘monetarily challenged’ realm of the public sector, for example in service planning. Where the subject of analysis is the individual and not the area, then lifestyles data does seem to offer advantages over more traditional geodemographic approaches. However, ‘question marks’ seem to lie over this data, the suspicion being that it is biased towards particular sections of the population (e.g. females and the elderly). More research is being undertaken to ascertain the nature of response bias in a lifestyles dataset.
Are better predicators of consumer behaviours emerging as the areal and aggregate typologies are integrated with measures of actual (disaggregate) individual characteristics (for example, Claritas’ ‘Lifestyle Universe’ product)? Does this give us the best of both worlds? Perhaps so. However, as proceeding discussions have insinuated, issues of ‘representativeness’ and response bias must be grappled before credible ‘data fusion’ can take place (Goodchild and Longley, forthcoming) and before geodemographics and lifestyles can be truly integrated.
