Gottmann's geographic literature spans over sixty years of activity -- between 1933 and 1994 -- and is composed of almost 400 titles, about twenty of which are books. Published mostly in French and English, his writings were translated in fourteen languages including Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Tamil, Dutch, Turkish, Slovenian, Japanese, Polish, Yiddish, German and modern Greek. Jean Gottmann's first official bibliography -- covering his writings between 1933 and 1984 -- was published in Patten, J. (ed.), 1983 in The Expanding City, Essays in honour of Professor Jean Gottmann, London-New York Academic Press, pp. xvii-xxxv. The same bibliography is entirely reprinted, with just one addition relative to 1983, in his volume of the same year: The Coming of the Transactional City, printed in College Park by the University of Maryland's Institute for Urban Studies. A selection of his publications dedicated to urban geography between 1949 and 1987 can be found in Jean Gottmann and Robert Harper, 1990, Since Megalopolis, the Urban Writings of Jean Gottmann, Baltimore and London, The Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 269-280. Thanks to the partial opening of the Fond Gottmann, housed at the Bibliothèque Nationale de France Département des Cartes et Plans it was possible to verify his entire bibliography on the same notebook where Gottmann kept note of his own publications. Finally, the information in this bibliograhy was compared to the one available from the indexes of those thematic volumes that are selections of previously published essays from different scientific journals. In particular Etudes sur l'Etat d'Israel (1958), Essais sur l'aménagement de l'espace habité (1966), La cité invincible (1983) e Since Megalopolis (1990). We would like to thank Jean-Yves Sarazin, curator of the Fond Gottmann at the Bibliothéque Nationale de France in Paris, for his kind re-reading of the complete bibliography. We would also like to invite the reader that may be informed of recent and/or posthumous publications of Jean Gottmann - not included in this list - to contact the author.
