Cybergeo is an open access journal. Its purpose is to allow a large diffusion of the scientific outputs with no charge either reader or author. In return the authors are requested to follow the instructions below, in order to facilitate the editorial process and to guarantee a high quality publication.
The journal deals with the entire range of geographical and social concerns and interests, with no preferences for any particular school or theme. It publishes in any European language.
The Electronic article offers completely new possibilities, permitting instant access to a network of resources, references and debates.  We therefore strongly encourage authors to insert hypertext links to their sources (articles cited, simulations, databases, etc.), in order to increase interactivity. For our part, we will commit ourselves to publishing pertinent reactions to your article.
Manuscripts should be uploaded to the following site:
http://manuscrits.revues.org/index.php/cybergeo/index
Please follow carefully the author submission guide and be sure that your article is anonymous. Not all articles that are submitted will be accepted.  Notice should be withheld in your publications until the article has been accepted after the peer review.
Articles will be submitted for the consideration of a peer review, as with printed journals, in the following stages:
At least two referees from the members of the editorial board will be responsible for reading each article.
After discussion among the members of the editorial board, a synthesis of the observations (acceptance or rejection, requests for changes or for supplementary material) will be communicated to the author, who will upload a revised version.
The articles that have been accepted will then be put online and made freely accessible on the website.
The electronic medium lends itself to shorter articles, but for in-depth articles, the journal will accept texts that are over 20 pages long.  As with journals on paper, certain criteria must be respected in the presentation of articles.
In addition to the original language, titles, abstracts and key-words in French and in English should be included.
We advise you to use the key-words mentioned on our site:
http://www.cybergeo.eu/index34.html
The final version of your article will include:
Names of the authors
Institution
Function
e-mail
In no case should tabulations, spaces or skipped pages be used, as they will disappear from the formatting when the text is printed. The whole text must be single spaced.
The text : Times New Roman 12.
For the titles of your paragraphs use the style “title 1, title 2 etc.” accessible on your toolbar as following:

Link words must refer back to sites that are accessible on the web, and not to local files.
Tables should be created by using the menu “table+insertion” in word
Graphics produced with excel should be converted into images
Notes should appear at the end of each page.
Bibliography must be placed at the end of the text in alphabetical order according to the names of the authors.
In your article, the presentation of your images should be as following :
Image
Title of your image
Source of your image (if necessary)
Legend of your image (if necessary)
Do not forget to mention the scale on your maps.
Your images should be included in your article, but they also should be joined separately. We recommend you to check the quality of your images. The resolution will not be less than 200-300 dpi. The image will be at least 1,000 pixels large.
Pay attention that the version of image is as much as possible close to the original and as less as possible damaged by the different recordings.
When you are working on your image, we advise you to save it in a format such as PSD or PNG or TIFF. For the final version, if you use photoshop, you should “Save under” and not “Save for the web” in order to keep the best quality. You may choose the JPEG format with a maximum quality (12). The PNG format can also be used, although the weight of such file may be higher. It can be used for articles with very few images. If your images include transparent zones avoid the PNG format.
The title of your images will placed below the image and not in the image. The titles will be numbered, e.g.: Figure 1: Downtown
The source should be clearly indicated. The source of the data used for the production of the image (e.g.: US census, 2001) or the source of the image if it does not belong to you. Please make sure that you have the right to cite or reproduce the image before submitting your article.
Batty M., 2001, "Polynucleated Urban Landscapes", Urban Studies, Vol.38, No.4, 635-655
Dematteis G., 1996, "Towards a unified metropolitan urban system in Europe : Core centrality versus network distributed centrality", in Pumain D., Saint-Julien Th. (eds.), Urban networks in Europe, Paris, INED and John Libbey Eurotext.
Hagget P., 2001, Geography: a global synthesis, London, Pearson Education.
Hard G., 1970, Die Landschaft der Sprache und die Landschaft der Geographen, Bonn, Ferd-Dümmlers Verlag.
Schwarz R.,1997, "Predicting wine quality from terrain. Characteristics by regression trees", Cybergeo : Revue européenne de géographie, No. 35, 07/11/97, 10 p. (http://www.cybergeo.eu)
